docs: introduce blogpost of ArgoCD and Keptn integration (#3521)
keptn/lifecycle-toolkit: docs/blog/posts/argocd-keptn-health.md

---
date: 2024-05-15
authors: [odubajDT]
description: >

>   In this blog post we will present how Keptn can show application health in integration with ArgoCD.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This blog post presents how Keptn can show application health when integrated with ArgoCD.
```

categories:
  - ArgoCD
  - Application health
comments: true
---

# Application health checks with Keptn using ArgoCD

In this blog post we will present a planned Keptn and
[ArgoCD](https://argo-cd.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) integration to execute
advanced application health checks using Keptn, where the application itself is deployed
by ArgoCD and display the Keptn application health status via ArgoCD UI.

Keptn provides an effective way to perform application health checks using the

> pre- or post-deployment tasks and evaluations.

Reviewer 2: let's add a link to the docs of these concepts/the related APIs

Compared to ArgoCD application
health checks, which are evaluating if the application is successfully deployed

> and the workloads are running on the cluster, they do not show if the microservices
> of a single application are able to communicate and cooperate with each other.

Reviewer 2: this sounds like Keptn specifically checks for the communication between the services. Can you rephrase this a bit to highlight that these kind of checks are just an example, and any kind of check can be done? maybe something like 
```suggestion
and the workloads are running on the cluster, they do not show if the microservices
of a single application are actually working as expected.
For example, it could be the case that the individual services are up and running, but due to a
networking misconfiguration they cannot communicate with each other.
```

Keptn pre- and post-deployment tasks and evaluations complement the missing functionality
by providing a straight-forward way to examine the application ability to perform

> actions for which it was developed to do.

Reviewer: The current phrasing tells first the solution and then the problem. I would swap the two, starting from the problem and then presenting how Keptn solves it. 
Namely:
1. What are the limitations of Argo
2. Use a concrete example: eg response time 1s but argo says it's healthy 
3. How Keptn solves this

<!-- more -->

## How it's going to work?

The integration of Keptn and ArgoCD performing and displaying full application
health checks is not fully implemented yet, but

> we can have a brief look how it might work in the future.

Reviewer: I think we can skip this since it's already stated as very first set of words on this blog post :)

> First of all, Keptn and ArgoCD need to be installed and enabled on the same

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keptn and ArgoCD need to be installed and enabled on the same
```

cluster.

> The reason is, we want to have ArgoCD performing the actual deployment
> of the application and Keptn executing the advanced application health checks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reason is that we want to have ArgoCD perform the actual deployment
of the application and Keptn executing the advanced application health checks.
```

> Additionally, we will need to have an ArgoCD extension, which will consist of

Reviewer 2: let's add a link to the docs about ArgoCD extensions here

Author: the link is one line under this, I guess it's ok

> React application extending the ArgoCD UI, implemented as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a React application extending the ArgoCD UI, implemented as
```

[ArgoCD UI Application Tab Extension](https://argo-cd.readthedocs.io/en/stable/developer-guide/extensions/ui-extensions/#application-tab-extensions)
and a proxy allowing Keptn (which will work as a backend service)
to push the application health status data to the ArgoCD UI.
For proxy setup, the
[ArgoCD proxy extension](https://argo-cd.readthedocs.io/en/stable/developer-guide/extensions/proxy-extensions/)

> will be used.

Reviewer: This is a bit too specific without getting into too many details 🤔 
I would rather expand and explain these in detail or remove the paragraph.

Author: I think it's ok, it gives the reader a brief overview of what is going to be done. ArgoCD has it documented pretty well.

## What's the added value of Keptn?

Let's try to show a real-life example of an application deployed via ArgoCD,
which has a healthy green status in ArgoCD UI, but it's not working as expected

> due to an internal misconfiguration of the application.

Reviewer: I would rather use "response time" as an example since it's more practical. In particular, we would use evaluations and not tasks which fits better the "health" check since tasks are more of a "do something" type of work

Reviewer: Also, someone might argue that reachability tests can be done from the application itself to set the readiness probe 🤔

> We will deploy a simple podtato-head application, which consists of multiple

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We will deploy a simple `podtato-head` application, which consists of multiple
```

Deployments and Services via ArgoCD.
The Argo Application deploying the manifests can look like the following:

```yaml
{% include "./argocd-keptn-health/argo-app.yaml" %}
```

After a few moments, the `podtato-head` application is successfully deployed and all pods
are running.

![Running Pods](./argocd-keptn-health/running-pods.png)

We can also examine the ArgoCD UI and everything seems to be working as expected and the
`podtato-head` application is healthy.

![Healthy App](./argocd-keptn-health/healthy-app.png)

Let's now try to add some health checks of the `podtato-head` application
and use Keptn to execute them.

> For this we are going to use the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this, we are going to use the
```

[Keptn Release Lifecycle Management](https://keptn.sh/stable/docs/getting-started/lifecycle-management/)
feature and perform the checks via `KeptnTasks`.

> First we need to add `KeptnTaskDefinition` into our GitOps repository, where our

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, we add `KeptnTaskDefinition` into our repository, where our
```

Reviewer: or `Git repository` if you prefer

`podtato-head` application lives.
It defines a simple test of reachability of one of the `podtato-head` application
services and confirms that this service is available.

> For simplicity we choose a very simple task that will fail for example purposes,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For simplicity, we choose a very simple task that will fail for example purposes,
```

> but in a real deployment more advanced checks can be used.

Reviewer: with response time, we can skip this sentence :)

```yaml
{% include "./argocd-keptn-health/taskdefinition.yaml" %}
```

> Additionally, we need to annotate the `podtato-head-frontend` Deployment to execute

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, we annotate the `podtato-head-frontend` Deployment to execute
```

the task as part of `post-deployment` checks.

```yaml
{% include "./argocd-keptn-health/annotation.yaml" %}
```

> After these two changes are made in our GitOps repository, we can restart the deployment
> of `podtato-head` application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After these two changes are made in Git, ArgoCD will see changes and re-trigger deployment of `podtato-head`
```

> After the restart, ArgoCD will re-deploy the application, Keptn waits until all of the
> application pods are running and afterwards executes `post-deployment` tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keptn waits until all of the
application pods are running and afterward, it executes `post-deployment` tasks.
```

Due to misconfiguration of the `podtato-head-frontend` Deployment, the service is exposed on
port `8080` instead of `8081` as it's expected by the task.
The executed `KeptnTask` therefore fails.

Here we can see that with the use of Keptn we can perform more advanced health checks
(tasks or evaluations) and verify that the application is healthy during the process
of deployment which is performed by ArgoCD.

> Similary to `KeptnTasks`, `KeptnEvaluations` can be executed as part of a quality health checks

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Similarly to `KeptnTasks`, `KeptnEvaluations` can be executed as part of a quality health checks
```

> Similary to `KeptnTasks`, `KeptnEvaluations` can be executed as part of a quality health checks

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Similary to `KeptnTasks`, `KeptnEvaluations` can be executed as part of a quality health check
```

for our application.

## How to show Keptn health status in ArgoCD UI?

Using Keptn together with ArgoCD brings a lot of value, which we saw in the previous section,

> but looking on application health status in the cluster is not the best user experience.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
but observing application health status by inspecting the status of the
various resources using `kubectl` is not the best user experience.
```

The data should be nicely displayed in the ArgoCD UI to provide the user with an overview
if the application was deployed, if it's synchronized and if it's healthy, all in
one place.

> Due to this reason, we are going to enhance ArgoCD UI with additional application health

Reviewer 2: this sounds a bit like we are modifying the actual ArgoCD UI - further above it was mentioned that this will be a UI extension, so let's briefly mention this here as well to avoid confusion - something like 

```suggestion
Due to this reason, we are going to implement an ArgoCD UI extension with additional application health
```

---
date: 2024-05-15
authors: [odubajDT]
description: >
  This blog post presents how Keptn can show application health when integrated with ArgoCD.
categories:
  - ArgoCD
  - Application health
comments: true
---

# Application health checks with Keptn using ArgoCD

In this blog post we will present a planned Keptn and
[ArgoCD](https://argo-cd.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) integration to execute

> advanced application health checks using Keptn, where the application itself is deployed
> by ArgoCD and display the Keptn application health status via ArgoCD UI.

Reviewer: I belive this is enough for the initial goal settings 
```suggestion
advanced application health checks using Keptn.
```

are running.

![Running Pods](./argocd-keptn-health/running-pods.png)

We can also examine the ArgoCD UI and everything seems to be working as expected and the
`podtato-head` application is healthy.

![Healthy App](./argocd-keptn-health/healthy-app.png)

Let's now try to add some health checks of the `podtato-head` application
and use Keptn to execute them.
For this, we are going to use the
[Keptn Release Lifecycle Management](https://keptn.sh/stable/docs/getting-started/lifecycle-management/)
feature and perform the checks via `KeptnTasks`.

First, we add `KeptnTaskDefinition` into our git repository, where our
`podtato-head` application lives.
It defines a simple test of reachability of one of the `podtato-head` application
services and confirms that this service is available.
For simplicity, we choose a very simple task that will fail for example purposes,
but in a real deployment more advanced checks can be used.

```yaml
{% include "./argocd-keptn-health/taskdefinition.yaml" %}
```

Additionally, we annotate the `podtato-head-frontend` Deployment to execute
the task as part of `post-deployment` checks.

```yaml
{% include "./argocd-keptn-health/annotation.yaml" %}
```

> After these two changes are made in our git repository, ArgoCD will see changes and re-trigger deployment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After these two changes are made in our git repository, ArgoCD will see changes and re-trigger the deployment
```

> of `podtato-head` application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of `podtato-head`.
```

but observing application health status by inspecting the status of the
various resources using `kubectl` is not the best user experience.
The data should be nicely displayed in the ArgoCD UI to provide the user with an overview
if the application was deployed, if it's synchronized and if it's healthy, all in
one place.

Due to this reason, we are going to implement an ArgoCD UI extension with additional application health
data, which are retrieved from Keptn.
This way, the ArgoCD UI will act as a single source of truth for the user providing all
the information about the deployed application.

Below you can see the first mockups how the extension of ArgoCD UI might look like
and how a failed `KeptnTask` and therefore unhealthy Keptn status of `podtato-head-frontend`
Deployment might be displayed on the main ArgoCD UI screen.

![Main screen unhealthy](./argocd-keptn-health/main-screen-unhealthy-keptn.png)

Additionally, it should be possible to examine also the details of the unhealthy
microservice and potentially see the reason of the failure of the checks.

![Details screen unhealthy](./argocd-keptn-health/details-screen-unhealthy-keptn.png)

## Summary

> Time to sum up what we have learned in this blog post.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Time to sum up what we have presented in this blog post.
```

## What's the added value of Keptn?

Let's try to show a real-life example of an application deployed via ArgoCD,
which has a healthy green status in ArgoCD UI, but it's not working as expected
due to a slow `response time` of the application.

We will deploy a simple [podtato-head](https://github.com/podtato-head/podtato-head)
application via ArgoCD, which consists of multiple Deployments and Services.
The Argo Application deploying the manifests can look like the following:

```yaml
{% include "./argocd-keptn-health/argo-app.yaml" %}
```

After a few moments, the `podtato-head` application is successfully deployed and all pods
are running.

![Running Pods](./argocd-keptn-health/running-pods.png)

We can also examine the ArgoCD UI and everything seems to be working as expected and the
`podtato-head` application is healthy.

![Healthy App](./argocd-keptn-health/healthy-app.png)

Let's now try to add some health checks of the `podtato-head` application
and use Keptn to execute them.
For this, we are going to use the
[Keptn Release Lifecycle Management](https://keptn.sh/stable/docs/getting-started/lifecycle-management/)
feature and perform the checks via `KeptnEvaluations`.

> For this example, we assume that you already have a metrics provider deployed

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For this example, we assume that you already have a data source
(such as Prometheus, Dynatrace, or Datadog)
deployed and configured as a metrics provider on your cluster.
```

> and configured on your cluster, which is able to fetch the `response time` values
> of the microservices.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This data provider can fetch the `response time` values
of the microservices.
```

---
date: 2024-05-15
authors: [odubajDT]
description: >
  This blog post presents how Keptn can show application health when integrated with ArgoCD.
categories:
  - ArgoCD
  - Application health
comments: true
---

# Application health checks with Keptn using ArgoCD

In this blog post we will present a planned Keptn and
[ArgoCD](https://argo-cd.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) integration to execute
advanced application health checks using Keptn.

Keptn provides an effective way to perform application health checks using the
pre- or post-deployment [tasks](https://keptn.sh/stable/docs/guides/tasks/)
and [evaluations](https://keptn.sh/stable/docs/guides/evaluations/).

> Compared to ArgoCD application
> health checks, which are evaluating if the application is successfully deployed
> and the workloads are running on the cluster, they do not show if the microservices
> of a single application are actually working as expected.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ArgoCD application health checks evaluate whether the application is successfully deployed
and the workloads are running on the cluster
but they do not show if the microservices
of a single application are actually working as expected.
```

For example, it could be the case that the individual services deployed by ArgoCD are up and

> running, but due to a slow `response time` (let's say `3s`) they are unable to communicate with each other.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
running, but due to a slow `response time` (let's say `3s`), the users would have a bad experience.
```

Keptn pre- and post-deployment tasks and evaluations complement the missing functionality

> by providing a straight-forward way to examine the application ability to perform
> actions for which it was developed to do.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
by providing a straight-forward way to examine the application's ability to perform
the actions for which it was developed.
```

> In this particular case, Keptn can perform `KeptnEvaluations` to examine, if the `response time`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this particular case, Keptn can perform `KeptnEvaluations` to examine whether the `response time`
```

of the application microservices are in the expected boundaries.

<!-- more -->

## How it's going to work?

Keptn and ArgoCD need to be installed and enabled on the same
cluster.
To install both components, you can follow the
[Keptn installation instructions](https://keptn.sh/stable/docs/installation/)

> as well as

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and
```

[ArgoCD installation instructions](https://argo-cd.readthedocs.io/en/stable/operator-manual/installation/).
The reason is that we want to have ArgoCD perform the actual deployment

> of the application and Keptn executing the advanced application health checks.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
of the application and Keptn execute the advanced application health checks.
```

> Additionally, we will need to have an ArgoCD extension, which will consist of

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Additionally, we will need to have an ArgoCD extension, which consists of
```

> a React application extending the ArgoCD UI, implemented as

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
a React application extending the ArgoCD UI, implemented as  an
```

[ArgoCD UI Application Tab Extension](https://argo-cd.readthedocs.io/en/stable/developer-guide/extensions/ui-extensions/#application-tab-extensions)
and a proxy allowing Keptn (which will work as a backend service)
to push the application health status data to the ArgoCD UI.
For proxy setup, the
[ArgoCD proxy extension](https://argo-cd.readthedocs.io/en/stable/developer-guide/extensions/proxy-extensions/)
will be used.

## What's the added value of Keptn?

Let's try to show a real-life example of an application deployed via ArgoCD,
which has a healthy green status in ArgoCD UI, but it's not working as expected
due to a slow `response time` of the application.

> We will deploy a simple `podtato-head` application, which consists of multiple

Reviewer: maybe we can point to https://github.com/podtato-head/podtato-head

Deployments and Services via ArgoCD.
The Argo Application deploying the manifests can look like the following:

```yaml
{% include "./argocd-keptn-health/argo-app.yaml" %}
```

After a few moments, the `podtato-head` application is successfully deployed and all pods
are running.

![Running Pods](./argocd-keptn-health/running-pods.png)

We can also examine the ArgoCD UI and everything seems to be working as expected and the
`podtato-head` application is healthy.

![Healthy App](./argocd-keptn-health/healthy-app.png)

Let's now try to add some health checks of the `podtato-head` application
and use Keptn to execute them.
For this, we are going to use the
[Keptn Release Lifecycle Management](https://keptn.sh/stable/docs/getting-started/lifecycle-management/)
feature and perform the checks via `KeptnEvaluations`.

> For this example, we assume that you already have a metrics provider deployed

Reviewer 3: Do you want to reference https://keptn.sh/stable/docs/guides/evaluatemetrics/#define-keptnmetricsprovider-resources for instructions about how to do this?

Author: here we mean more metrics provider like Prometheus, Datadog or Dynatrace

and configured on your cluster, which is able to fetch the `response time` values
of the microservices.
In our setup, we are going to use [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/).

First, we need to create [KeptnMetric](https://keptn.sh/stable/docs/reference/crd-reference/metric/)
and [KeptnMetricsProvider](https://keptn.sh/stable/docs/reference/crd-reference/metricsprovider/)
resources in our cluster.

> These two resources contain a simple query for fetching `response time` of the `podtato-head`
> application microservice as well as configuration for the metrics provider supplying the data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These two resources contain a simple query for fetching the `response time` of the `podtato-head`
application microservice and configuration for the metrics provider supplying the data.
```

```yaml
{% include "./argocd-keptn-health/metric.yaml" %}
```

Next, we add `KeptnEvaluationDefinition` into our git repository, where our
`podtato-head` application lives.
It defines the [SLO](https://www.dynatrace.com/news/blog/what-are-slos/)
by linking the existing `KeptnMetric` resource and providing the rule the value should fullfil.

```yaml
{% include "./argocd-keptn-health/evaluationdefinition.yaml" %}
```

Additionally, we annotate the `podtato-head-frontend` Deployment to execute
the task as part of `post-deployment-evaluation` checks.

```yaml
{% include "./argocd-keptn-health/annotation.yaml" %}
```

After these two changes are made in our git repository, ArgoCD will see changes and re-trigger
the deployment of `podtato-head`.
Keptn waits until all of the
application pods are running and afterwards, it executes `post-deployment-evaluation` tasks.

Due to slow `response time` of the `podtato-head-frontend` microservice, the
executed `KeptnEvaluation` fails.

Here we can see that with the use of Keptn we can perform more advanced health checks

> (tasks or evaluations) and verify that the application is healthy during the process
> of deployment which is performed by ArgoCD.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
(tasks or evaluations) and verify that the deployed application is healthy,
to supplement the ArgoCD verification that the deployment is healthy.
```
This may need more rework.  But the current text says that Keptn is veryifying the ArgoCD "process of deployment" and I don't think that is what you mean.

> Similarly to `KeptnEvaluations`, `KeptnTasks` can be executed as part of a quality health check

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Like `KeptnEvaluations`, `KeptnTasks` can be executed as part of a quality health check
```

for our application.

## How to show Keptn health status in ArgoCD UI?

Using Keptn together with ArgoCD brings a lot of value, which we saw in the previous section,
but observing application health status by inspecting the status of the
various resources using `kubectl` is not the best user experience.
The data should be nicely displayed in the ArgoCD UI to provide the user with an overview

> if the application was deployed, if it's synchronized and if it's healthy, all in

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
of whether the application was deployed successfully, if it's synchronized, and if it's healthy, all in
```

one place.

> Due to this reason, we are going to implement an ArgoCD UI extension with additional application health
> data, which are retrieved from Keptn.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To implement this, we are going to implement an ArgoCD UI extension with additional application health
data that are retrieved from Keptn.
```

> This way, the ArgoCD UI will act as a single source of truth for the user providing all

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This way, the ArgoCD UI will act as a single source of truth for the user, providing all
```

the information about the deployed application.

> Below you can see the first mockups how the extension of ArgoCD UI might look like

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Below you can see the first mock-ups that show what the ArgoCD UI extension might look like
```

and how a failed `KeptnEvaluation` and therefore unhealthy Keptn status of `podtato-head-frontend`

> Deployment might be displayed on the main ArgoCD UI screen.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
deployment might be displayed on the main ArgoCD UI screen.
```

Author: Here I am trying to refer to a k8s Deployment, I would rather keep it capitalized

![Main screen unhealthy](./argocd-keptn-health/main-screen-unhealthy-keptn.png)

> Additionally, it should be possible to examine also the details of the unhealthy

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Additionally, it should be possible to also examine the details of the unhealthy
```

microservice and potentially see the reason of the failure of the checks.

![Details screen unhealthy](./argocd-keptn-health/details-screen-unhealthy-keptn.png)

## Summary

Time to sum up what we have presented in this blog post.
We have seen how Keptn can easily complement ArgoCD
and enhance its functionality by providing more insights into
application health status.
We showed an example where ArgoCD wasn't able to detect that
the deployed application is not healthy and used `KeptnEvaluations`
for performing more advanced checks.
In the end, we looked at the first drafts of the potential
ArgoCD UI extension and how it can easily display the
`Keptn health status` as part of the standard ArgoCD application
health status.

We hope that this blog post gives you an idea and some inspiration
on how these two projects can cooperate and complement each other
effectively in order to support continuous delivery of applications

> more reliable and faster.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
faster. and more reliably.
```

which has a healthy green status in ArgoCD UI, but it's not working as expected
due to a slow `response time` of the application.

We will deploy a simple [podtato-head](https://github.com/podtato-head/podtato-head)
application via ArgoCD, which consists of multiple Deployments and Services.
The Argo Application deploying the manifests can look like the following:

```yaml
{% include "./argocd-keptn-health/argo-app.yaml" %}
```

After a few moments, the `podtato-head` application is successfully deployed and all pods
are running.

![Running Pods](./argocd-keptn-health/running-pods.png)

We can also examine the ArgoCD UI and everything seems to be working as expected and the
`podtato-head` application is healthy.

![Healthy App](./argocd-keptn-health/healthy-app.png)

Let's now try to add some health checks of the `podtato-head` application
and use Keptn to execute them.
For this, we are going to use the
[Keptn Release Lifecycle Management](https://keptn.sh/stable/docs/getting-started/lifecycle-management/)
feature and perform the checks via `KeptnEvaluations`.

Apart from `KeptnEvaluations`, `KeptnTasks` can be used to execute health checks

> of an application as well, for example perfoming an http request to test

Author: ```suggestion
of an application as well, for example performing an HTTP request to test
```
